---
title: "We are looking for an intern"
date: 2017-08-16
excerpt: "We are looking for an intern who will work on Rethink Aadhaar’s communications and outreach efforts, as well as monitoring developments and news on the Aadhaar project, which is now the world’s largest biometrics database.  The person will be mentored and guided by several Rethink Aadhaar campaign m"
sourceUrl: "https://rethinkaadhaar.in/blog/2017/8/16/call-for-interns"
---

<p>We are looking for an intern who will work on Rethink Aadhaar’s communications and outreach efforts, as well as monitoring developments and news on the Aadhaar project, which is now the world’s largest biometrics database.</p><p>The person will be mentored and guided by several Rethink Aadhaar campaign members, who work in areas of law, social policy, economics research, and advocacy.</p><p><strong>Deadline</strong><br />The target start date for the internship is September 2017 – so apply soon!</p><p><strong>Interns can expect to undertake the following responsibilities:</strong></p><ol><li>Track developments related to Aadhaar project in parliament and state legislature discussions, public records, government notifications</li><li>Follow ongoing Right to Privacy, and Aadhaar legal challenge hearings in the Supreme Court</li><li>Visit Aadhaar enrolment centers, other facilities, fair price shops, to research and document facts on Aadhaar enrolment and authentication through articles, blogposts, short videos</li><li>Assist in the drafting of press releases in English/Hindi, and performing other related duties as required including the Rethink Aadhaar campaign’s social media presence</li></ol><p><strong>Some of the benefits of interning at Rethink Aadhaar include:</strong></p><ul><li>Develop research and organization skills</li><li>Deeper understanding of the communications and policy environment on Aadhaar project</li><li>Grow a network and get familiar with the policy and advocacy space in New Delhi.</li><li>Work in a motivated group of individuals in a campaign who share data, and findings from the ground on experience of citizens in the Aadhaar project</li></ul><p><strong>Qualifications</strong></p><p>Ideally, candidates are recent graduates or students of Law, Communications, Journalism, International Relations, Public Policy, Economics, Political Science, Sociology, or related fields. This is a great opportunity for someone who’s looking for experience to understand how legal and parliamentary research is done, as well as the work of grassroots campaigns in the social policy space.</p><ul><li>While a legal background is not required, a working knowledge of legal debate over and background of Aadhaar project is highly favourable</li><li>A genuine interest in human rights, social policy, field research</li><li>Good written communication skills</li><li>Motivated to work and learn</li></ul><p><strong>Location</strong></p><p>The internship will be in New Delhi. We will try to provide office space as and when required, but we are counting on your interest and motivation to get work done at home</p><p><strong>Time Commitment and Terms</strong></p><ul><li>This position will start in September 2017. The duration of the position will be two months, and can be extended</li><li>It is open to candidates finishing studies, who need a flexible schedule</li><li>The internship will not be remunerated, but we will provide support for any travel related to research or documentation on Aadhaar scheme’s implementation</li><li>We will try provide need-based stipends</li></ul><p><strong>Application Requirements</strong></p><p>To apply, send a copy of your CV and a brief cover letter explaining your interest and qualifications for the position, and one reference to contact@rethinkaadhaar.in. Please use “Internship Application– [Your Name]” as the subject line.</p><p>Women, Adivasi, Dalit individuals are encouraged to apply.</p>
