---
title: "Statement on Delhi Government mandating Aadhaar number for Compensation Forms"
date: 2020-03-04
excerpt: "Rethink Aadhaar condemns the Delhi govt mandating quoting of riot victims’ Aadhaar numbers on the compensation forms."
sourceUrl: "https://rethinkaadhaar.in/blog/2020/3/4/statement-on-delhi-government-mandating-aadhaar-number-for-compensation-forms"
---

<p>Rethink  Aadhaar condemns the Delhi Government’s move to make quoting the Aadhaar number mandatory on the <a href="https://cdn.s3waas.gov.in/s3c06d06da9666a219db15cf575aff2824/uploads/2020/02/2020022983.pdf" target="_blank">compensation forms</a> for victims of the  ongoing Delhi Riots. The provision of compensation is a basic necessity  and need that the Delhi Government is obligated to fulfil in order for  the city of Delhi to rebuild and recover.<br><br>Even  as we write this letter, civil society organisations and student bodies  are working towards ensuring timely relief work. The death toll is  still rising, as volunteers are now discovering unclaimed dead bodies  from several parts of North-East Delhi. As of 2 March, the official  death toll remains at 42 even though four more bodies were fished out of  drains in North-East Delhi on Sunday. The wounded are still grappling  with the reality of the extremely tedious paperwork at hospitals.  First-hand witnesses are figuring out ways to deal with the  documentation and evidence collection.<br><br>Homes,  possessions, properties, valuables, and lives have been lost in this  violence. In this ongoing crisis, many  have lost everything in arson incidents including their identity cards. To ask survivors of  a riot, which has also been described as a pogrom, to prove their identity is both impractical and often an impossibility. This  is the latest brutal example of the shifting of the state's burden of  identifying and compensating victims of violence upon the victims  themselves.&nbsp;<strong>We strongly advocate that the&nbsp;Delhi Government work  proactively towards assuaging the persons and families affected by the  violence and towards compensating them.&nbsp;</strong>We cannot  emphasize enough the need for urgent unconditional government  interventions with timely relief.<br><br>The  Aadhaar project, at the best of times, does not work. It is riddled  with problems, the very least of include wrong names, birth dates,  addresses, incorrectly entered details. To make such a shoddy system a  prior condition for aid in a time of disaster and crisis is  reprehensible and must be stopped.<br><br><strong>The  Delhi Government must remove the demand for Aadhaar numbers from its  compensation forms</strong>. We further urge the government to take all  necessary steps to provide full aid and support to the survivors of the  Delhi Riots without imposing any further conditions.</p>
